Welcome back.
This is a big one and one of my favorites.
This really shows the power of functional programming which up until now has been a little bit confusing.
It's been a lot of functions a lot of pure functions but it's hard to see the use in what we've learned.
We've just learned a bunch of terminology but it hasn't really made us a better programmer starting
in this video.
We're gonna start to uncover some of these pieces so that when we work on our final exercise we understand
how powerful this can be and compose is definitely the most powerful concept in my opinion at least
composing or composition is the idea that any sort of data transformation that we do should be obvious.
It's kind of like a conveyor belt right in a factory.
We have data that gets processed by a function that outputs some sort of data and that data gets processed
by another function that outputs that data in a new form and so on and so forth compose ability is a
system design principle that deals with this relationship of components how we can compose different
components of a factory that works on let's say a conveyor belt and a highly composed able system provides
components that can be selected and assembled in various combinations just like an assembly line.
We're moving this machine here.
This machine here it's easy to move pieces around to get the desired output based on the user's specific
requirements.
Let's write some code to see what I mean.
And I'm giving you a bit of a warning.
This gets a little complicated at first you might need a few minutes on your own after this video to
code this along and figure out exactly what happens.
But trust me initially it's going to look hard with time this will become easier and easier.
Let's say I want to do something using functional programming.
So we want to keep all our functions pure and we want to do something interesting.
We want to do two things at a time.
We want to have a number like minus 50 that well gets multiplied by three.
And then we also want to take the absolute off.
That means we want a number that's always positive.
So we also want to make sure that we remove any negative side from it.
We want to do two things.
Two functions.
How can we compose them together like an assembly line at a factory.
Well I want to have a function that I'm going to call multiply by three and absolute.
All right.
Not the best name in the world but at least this shows that we're doing multiple things and I want to
do that operation that I told you about.
But in order for me to do that I need to compose these two pieces of functionality.
How can we do that.
Well in functional programming you can use something called compose now compose doesn't exist in JavaScript.
However it's so common that there are a ton of libraries that actually lets you use compose.
For example one of the best libraries when it comes to JavaScript and functional programming is rammed
up and rammed up as you can see comes with compose and we can use compose like this r dot to compose
and we can pass it in functions just like an assembly line to operate on data but for now I don't want
to use any library.
I want to build our own.
I want to build a compose function that allows us to multiply by three and then also lets say take absolute
which means take that absolute number and make sure that there's no negative signs at all or you know
what let's say make positive because that's why we want so I want a compose function that when given
a number is going to multiply by three and make positive.
How can we do this.
Well let's define our own compose function in this compose function is going to take while the two functions
so let's call it and this is f and g and f and g is going to return a another function in this function
is going to receive the data.
So whatever we want to multiply by three and absolute that number let's say in our example we want to
be able to call multiply by three and absolute minus 50 so minus 50 is going to be the data now in here.
The compose is going to accept F and G which is multiplied by three and make positive which is going
to return a function right here that takes data and this data.
Well what are we gonna do with it.
First I want to take this data data over here which is minus 50 and I want our first while apply the
make positive.
So I'm going to say G is going to call data and then after that gets evaluated I want to multiply by
three.
Well again functions are first class citizens.
And this.
When that gets done I want you to call f which in our case is multiply by three.
I hope that makes sense if not just playback this video and see if you follow step by step.
Now if I run this I get an error rate because multiply by three and make positive is not really a thing.
So let's make those as well let's make multiply by three and you see here that I'm just creating pure
functions here multiply by three is going to take a number and it's going to Well multiply that by three.
Nice and simple and then make positive is going to take once again a number and we're going to use the
built in math dot a B.S. which does exactly that turns a number into the absolute number which again
that means removing the minus.
So now if I run this I get a hundred fifty because 50 multiplied by three is one hundred fifty and we
make that an absolute number which turns it into while we remove the negative.
How cool is that using compose we've created our little assembly line where we can compose different
functions together and that's what is.
Remember the definition compose ability is a system design principle that deals with the relationship
between components.
These are the components that can be selected and assembled in various combinations.
I can move this around so that multiplied by three is here.
And make positive is here so that the order of operation changes just like moving little machinery around
an assembly line.
And I hope you see the power in and compose here because now we can compose functions build them together
to add extra functionality to create that data flow where we take a piece of data we take it through
all these functions and then finally we have some sort of data that gets output because all those functions
are pure and all those functions well are composed of all.
Now when it comes to compose that's one of the most common functions that you're going to see in a programming
language or a programming paradigm.
Like I said RAMDANI Well it definitely has compose and most of the time.
If you're using functional programming concepts while you're definitely using compose but there's also
another thing called pipe which is actually not that difficult pipe is essentially the same thing except
instead of going from right to left it goes left to right.
Let me show you what I mean.
If instead of compose we want to create pipe well pipe is simply the order will be different.
So instead of G over here we just swap these around so that now with pipe the operations are different.
F gets run first over the data.
So that's the first parameter that we give and compose.
So that means multiply by three gets run first and then G gets run over that data.
So make positive gets run first now a better way for me to demonstrate this to you is like this imagine
if we had a function one that takes it as a parameter a function and that function is function too.
That itself takes a function which is function three and that itself takes 50.
Now I know that's confusing but with composing pipe this is what we can do.
We can do compose function 1 then function 2 then function 3.
And then finally we give it the 50
so with compose what we can do is say hey I want you to evaluate this right to left that is take the
data then apply function 3 to it whatever comes out of that apply function to do it whatever comes out
of that apply function want to pipe is just the opposite type says do.
Function three first then function 1 or 2 then function 1.
So if I do 50 these two functions are going to have the exact same output because the order is actually
the same.
The only difference is that pipe is going to grab 50 and then start off with function 3 just like compose
start off with function 3 and then do function to then function 1.
So goes left to right now I'm only mentioning this here because you'll see these changed interchangeably
and you can use whichever one you prefer for your readability and I'm also going to use this technique
in our final exercise to compose our shopping cart.
All right.
Hopefully this doesn't hurt your brain too much but I also hope that you see some of the power that
comes with it.
We've just created these tiny little functions that as you can see can be easily tested are pure but
we're able to compose them together to do something more complex like multiplied by three and absolute.
Let's take a break and I'll see you in the next one.
Bye bye.